Feminists Discuss Caste and Gender in Science: An Online Dialogue
Anita Mehta, Chayanika Shah, Gita Chadha, Mary E. John, Mina Swaminathan, Prajval Shastri and Sumi Krishna
spontaneous online discussion on Feminist Science Studies- India (FSS-India) took place over six days: 11-16 March 2011.' It was sparked off by Abha Sur's talk at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), Mumbai, in early 2011, based on her book that appeared later that year, Dispersed Radiance: Caste, Gender and Modern Science in India.2 Posting a brief account of the talk, Gita Chadha commented: 'Abha was trying to make a connection, a correlation, perhaps not a hard causal one, between Meghnad Saha's caste position (OBC) and his physics. While I think this is an important exercise, it is nevertheless a difficult one. She was trying to suggest that Saha's caste politics was reflected in his understanding of the physical universe.' Following this, Sumi Krishna shared an earlier email in which Abha had described her work as a socially informed history of physics in India in the first half of the twentieth century, with the central theme being social stratification and its consequences for the practice of physics. Abha had written, 'In my book] I have analysed the ways in which caste, gender and colonial relations impact the production of scientific knowledge, scientific institutions, national science policy, and, last but not least, science studies itself. Two strands distinguish the book from other contemporary works. First, this is a study of modern physics from the perspective of subordinated populations. Second, although the work draws upon the insights of postcolonial, poststructural scholarship, it remains partial to the possibility of scientific truth.' Aswathy Raveendran, convenor of the FSS-India group, circulated 'Scientism and Social Justice: Meghnad Saha's Critique of the State of Science in India', an article written by Abha Sur (2002). Aswathy projected Abha's argument: 'Saha tried to balance scientism with social justice-a mixture that ultimately faltered in the face of deeply rooted class and caste tics.'
This ensued a broad-ranging and lively exchange on a 'universal language of science' vis-à-vis caste locations and gendered stand- points, flowing into a 'practical' discussion about enhancing com- munications between scientists and social scientists, with some participants suggesting that artists and designers could provide the bridge.
Anita Mehta
I have reservations about Abha's argument on bringing caste into Meghnad Saha's scientific vision. To be honest, in their mature work, most of India's well-known scientists seem to have spoken the universal language of science rather than one deriving from their individual backgrounds. Using caste to explain things is rather popular in the West, whereas in most parts of India, at least in science, caste is pretty generally irrelevant and certainly completely unrelated in comparison to gender. I think Abha's work would have been more exciting if she had included the inner stories of contemporary women scientists (even if this had necessitated some degree of anonymity). This is because at least for women scientists like me, feminism in science should primarily involve activism, correction of palpable injustice, addressing establishmentarian misogyny, rather than let it remain at the level of academic discourse or historical anecdote.
Gita Chadha
agree that feminist science studies needs to attend to both matters-address issues of injustice meted to women in science and also read gender in the production of scientific knowledge for which we first need to read culture/society in the production scientific knowledge. So I am one with the feminists who are ming to do the latter, Abha being one more. So in principle, Sers is an important exercise, though I do have some reservations.
Mina Swaminathan
is not only about the nationalist period-casteist attitudes in many leading scientists in present times have become obvious Sor instance, Ramanna's autobiography). They do not even try cover it up or make excuses, because surprisingly, they do not yet think it is embarrassing to be found holding such prejudices. Most of them are strong believers in the 'merit' theory, which they are unable to define, because they do not have the vocabulary, e 'cultural capital' to talk about it rationally (may I say sarcastically, scientifically"). Defence of the 'holy cow' of merit is a regular em in all convocation lectures and other such occasions. I am ad someone is taking/has taken it apart, Caste, to my mind, is a bigger can of worms than gender. If we can introduce a debate about it, maybe bringing in gender will be easier. What about women scientists? Perhaps we need to have more discussions on these issues and less about gender-in-the-institution.
Sumi Krishna
While issues of justice to women in science definitely need to be tended, as has been pointed out by Gita, we must also address production of scientific knowledge. In our context, this has both a gender and caste dimension.
I was struck by Anita Mchtal's use of the phrase 'universal language of science' in arguing that the 'mature vision' of 'most well-known Indian scientists' has not been affected by their background (caste) and that caste is 'pretty irrelevant' in comparison to gender. It would be wonderful to be proved wrong but my sense is that class/caste is as relevant as gender in terms of vision and perhaps more important in the day-to-day workings of contemporary science. There is, however, far greater resistance to interrogate the role of caste than that of gender in scientific institutions. The concept of merit, for example, is embroiled in both caste and gender bias.
I would also like to draw your attention to a letter that appeared in EPW (Economic and Political Weekly) in 2008 related to the death of a dalit Ph.D. student in the School of Physics of Hyderabarl Central University (HCU). The university's internal enquiry report (made public only after a RTI application) said, 'it is a fact that most of the students affected by the inconsistencies and ambiguities in procedures were SC/ST students' (p. 4). Even more significantly, all the physics students that this Committee could meet have reported their sense that the School was acting against the interests of the SC/ST students' (ibid.).
Anita Mehta
My points of view are that of a practising physicist (with no gender/ caste biases to the best of my awareness; being someone who was born with no caste, and who is a woman in science!), and my sources are equally those appropriate to someone who has studied and worked in Indian science for most of her career, rather than being a social scientist.
I was not aware of the horrific dalit student's suicide in HCU, but you will recall that I had said that caste was irrelevant in 'most' parts of India. At least in West Bengal, where perhaps caste is less relevant than in certain other states, I have seen no evidence of caste bias, while I've witnessed several instances of gender bias. Several of my colleagues and students are from the 'lower castes'. Though women are still relatively rare in conversations, male colleagues frequently make digs at women in science, while caste backgrounds are never discussed, much less mocked. (In a recent
Feminists Discuss Caste and Gender in Science
selection process, when an unsuitable candidate was made an offer, a colleague sniggered about the 'political abilities of women scientists'; now that I think about it, none however, had invoked caste, high or low, when discussing unsuitable selections).
The universal language of science that I speak of is indeed something that many scientists, male and female, will agree exists. Taking the example of theoretical physics, there is little room for subjectivity, for instance, in the solution of an equation or the logic of a mathematical argument which forms the backbone of a physical theory. Different assumptions logically lead to different theories. While there is some room for divergence of opinion here, there is nevertheless a rather narrow range compared to more subjective disciplines, being pinned down, on the one hand, by experimental evidence of the natural world and on the other by mathematical axioms. This universal language of science is what makes even those who disagree with a particular theory (based on assumptions different from theirs) appreciate the elegance of the mathematical logic that might underpin it.
Of course, one needs to be trained long and hard in mathematics, for example, to be able to do the kind of work that, for instance, Satyendranath Bose was known for in his mature phase, and for which he is admired universally. Undoubtedly, there is a selection rule that operates here-those who are born to relative affluence and can therefore access such training easily, or those who, like Prof. R.A. Mashelkar, are able to survive on the pavements during their early years, but get to the highest reaches of science in their later lives.
Mary E. John
This discussion has aroused several issues like questions of universalism, language of mathematics and logic, so frequently used in science, and practices of discrimination of whatever kind. whether gender or caste.
Caste issues are even more complex than those of gender because we live in an ostensibly casteless society where there is little open discussion on this issue, and West Bengal is an interesting case in point. (But are we really casteless? Some of us have argued that caste inequalities are still being reproduced today, perhaps in non-explicit ways (the fact that there are such strong correlations between caste and class, for instance, is not accidental), and that it is the urban upper castes who are most likely to think of themselves as being without caste, in much the same way as men often think of themselves as being without gender, as being neutral and universal.
I agree with Sumi that the caste question is much more challenging to think about than the gender question in science studies (and possibly elsewhere as well). Practices of discrimi- nation, as happens in many contexts, including those of science, is a major issue in and of itself. Dalit students have talked about this a great deal, not only in the context of Senthil's suicide at HCU, but also in the IITs Indian Institutes of Technology) and medical colleges. In many universities in North India, dalit students effectively stay in different parts of student hostels, sit at different tables in the mess, and so on. This has been well documented.
The other issue raised by Anita and by Abha in her book is whether and how our worldviews and research are affected by who we are. If I have understood Anita right, 'mature' science is somehow not at all affected by the social location or identity of the scientist/observer/researcher but achieves a neutral, objectivist stance that has nothing to do with context or location. The language of mathematics is also seen as proof of this neutrality and non- bias. However, certain streams in feminist science have questioned this particular model of universality and objectivity, claiming that context/social location is also constitutive of science, and it needs to be taken into account. There are many different versions of this thesis (a good place where these are discussed is Sandra Harding 1986).
My question would be why is mathematics given such a pure status by virtue of its seeming reliance on a universal language? What can and cannot be said through this language? Why are the social sciences thought of as somehow lesser precisely because they must rely on context and partial perspectives, and do take the identity of the researcher into account? In my view, taking the identity of the researcher into account adds to the objectivity of science rather than diminishing it in some way. One of the reasons I'left' mathematics (which I did in my B.Sc. and enjoyed at the time) for the social sciences, was a sense of how little it could achieve without the 'truths' of social life.
Chayanika Shah
I completely agree with Mary in her framing of the many threads that this conversation is interweaving. I want to share, in this context, one poignant memory of my student days and some thoughts on the universal language of science. The memory is of early 1980, immediately after I joined IIT Bombay (IITB) as a research scholar in physics. Four students went on hunger strike because the institute had asked them to leave their programmes, after having been there for more than four years, as they had got 'F grades once too often in some of their courses. All the four students had got admission to IIT under some sort of affirmative action policies, either as dalit students or under the foreigners' quota. They were protesting against the rules of the institute which admitted students through affirmative action and then did not give them any special coaching, support or care but put them in 'competition' with the rest of their class in a system of relative grading. The whole system was geared towards their failure in spite of the fact that there were claims from the institute that it made certain exemptions in the number of attempts allowed to such students and so on and so forth.
This hunger strike led to the only student strike occurring in IIT Bombay (IITB) when students went on a mass boycott of classes and even gheraoed the director who had to be escorted out by policemen! The demands of the student agitation were for support and some sort of special care and coaching for these students so that they could cope with the system. We were for affirmative action but also, perhaps, a bit enamoured by the system of merit and did not ask for it to be done away with. However, as students we did protest against the institute for its inhuman policies. (It is another matter that the only other time I have heard of agitation on IITB campus by students was against the Mandal recom- mendations in 1990!)
The result of our agitation was that by the end of the same day the draconian institute broke the students' fast forcibly, went around identifying the vocal persons supporting the agitation and announced the indefinite closure of the institute that very night. We were all expected to empty our hostel rooms and leave within 48 hours irrespective of which part of the country or world we came from! And then, when we were called back we had to sign letters saying that we would not participate in any coercive actions against the institute. This got challenged and the students won the case and people like me also got our first chance to hear the impressive and fiery Indira Jaising fight the students' case in the Bombay High Court.' But all of this is digression from the point of this discussion and I come back to it with profuse apologies for this long-winded sojourn into nostalgia.
I think that this assertion of some kind of merit and its success is in itself a powerful tool for the exclusion of all those who do not have access to this kind of training. And this assertion of a certain seemingly objective logic and rationality completely hides the pro-privilege bias within it. I am sure there are examples such as the one I have given, and those such as Senthil Kumar's, from every department of higher education. The difference in science institutions is that the argument of logic and rationality further add to the already privileged castes' casteless vision of everything around and makes the practice within the sciences opaque to any scrutiny from within or without.
And that brings me to the universal language of science. I agree with what Mary has to say of the many lenses (feminist in particular), which have looked at this privileging of mathematical logic, language and reason, and the prevention of any scrutiny at all of this language of science. Practising scientists usually make a huge effort to distinguish between the essence and practice of science. To my mind this is a very artificial divide and serves no purpose other than to push us to believe that a completely 'neutral' study of anything is possible and that the real truth is essentially obtained
only through that pure application of method. What I have learnt from the social sciences is the principle of reflexivity and questioning of the practice and the practitioner, for there is no enquiry or search for any knowledge that can be separated from these.
And in that sense, I find Abha's work interesting for she is trying not only to see the obvious discriminatory practices within science towards persons from marginalized castes and gender but also trying to look at their work to see if a conscious occupation of these locations affected the ways in which they model and study the universe around them. The exercise may lack in both social science and natural science rigour but I think that this field is too nascent to be put to very strict scrutiny even before it develops and acquires its own norms and rigour.
Sumi Krishna
The two aspects of the question which Gita mentioned and as these have been framed here-knowledge and practice-need to be addressed separately but both are also interlinked to underlying worldviews, which are clearly (to my mind) influenced by one's location. Several years ago I had looked at a set of autobiographical essays of a few distinguished liberal/progressive Indian scientists, all men. What I learnt from that small exercise, was that (apart from the lack of reflection and the general gender blindness') the cognitive culture of science, the accepted metaphors and so on, seemed quite explicitly, in one particular case (Madhav Gadgil), to be consciously derived from a Sanskritic tradition with all its biases. However, I was not sure whether this could be linked to his thesis of the ecological origin and value of castes.
Recently, Mina Swaminathan drew my attention to the auto- biography of Raja Ramanna (1991). I have not read the book but have just come across a paper on it by Sankaran Krishna (2006). The Bomb, Biography and the Indian Middle Class'. Sankaran Krishna unpacks Ramanna's text to reveal his deep-rooted discomfort with the masses, his anchoring of identity in his caste (Mysore brahmin-Hebbar Iyengar), his view of 'politics' as something that thwarts 'merit', and so on. Such a reading shows up the shallowness of the egalitarianism and democratic outlook that are also professed, which Sankaran Krishna argues, reflect the 'unself-reflexive majoritarianism' of the Hindu upper-caste middle-class, a 'fractured modernity'.
I think what is important to analyse is precisely this disjunction between the disciplinary leaning towards a 'universal language of science' and the problematic location and lived experience of the upper-caste middle-class scientist. It is another question that the 'universal language of science' elides into the 'universal language of mathematics' which, one should add, is a notion shared also by many economists.
Regarding the specifics of the working situation of women scientists, it is also telling that women technicians, lab attendants, paramedics, and so on, are rarely included in these discussions. There is a fair amount of anecdotal information that gendered harassment (by men, for instance, laboratory heads) is directed towards these women more sharply than against women researchers, postdoctoral fellows, and so on. I imagine that there would be a class-caste angle to this too.
Gita Chadha
My observations and the commonsensical understanding of the scientific community in India, in research institutes and uni- versities, and IITs is that they continue to be dominated by the upper castes, men and women. Historically, we know that this could be linked to the fact that they were the early recipients of formal education, so crucial to the development of modern science. This we all know is applicable to other 'academic' and 'intellectual' pursuits and is not unique to science per se. But can one argue that there was a special combination of the elite in the development of science? Let's say that this was an elite combine of class and caste? And, more importantly, unlike the bureaucracy, scientific institutions were small and highly gated and the concentration of the elite led to a very tight reproduction of its interests and its discourse. Further, the regional domination of the south, Tamil Nadu, in particular, in mathematics has been overwhelming. The Bengali brahmin has dominated physics, theoretical physics, in particular. I have many times heard the refrain that perhaps it is the brahmanical mind which is 'naturally' wired towards abstraction. Therefore, I think, the discourse on 'natural' and 'innate' endowments has to be challenged in order to counter this mindset which leads to gated-ness. Can we attribute the fact that number theory and other abstract disciplines in mathematics were made thrust areas of places like the School of Math at TIFR Tata Institute of Fundamental Research) due to a brahmanical preoccupation with this and other such things? In my arguments I have had to say often that there is nothing wrong in this itself but the fact that it does not allow other preoccupations both amongst the brahmins and from other groups to come in- that is, the gated-ness-is the problem.
I appreciate Sumi and Mary's point but am really not sure if I want to say that caste is more crucial a margin than gender or even religion. I do not find Muslims on the campus where I live and also on other such campuses, for instance. Or perhaps, even Parsis, despite a Homi Bhabha. They are perhaps even fewer in number than women. The campus I live on also becomes highly fundamentalist, on and off, and the most 'rational' way of looking at things I am told is to look at both sides.
Interestingly, the scientific community feels that as a social scientist, it becomes more of my responsibility to be 'neutral' and 'objective' while looking at society. (This is classic positivism and my private demon, the 'scientific temper', is evoked here.). The scientific institutions are closed to all people on the margins; it has been only open to the powerful minorities. But there has been no systematic study on this.
On the question of universalism: is there an Islamic science or a Vedic science? I am often asked this when we critique uni- versalism. And then, is there a feminist science? These are crucial and difficult questions. To my mind the idea of an Islamic or Vedic science must be thrown out not only simply because it is too steeped in identity politics, but also because a lot of science that thrived in non-western civilizations has been erased. Sandra Harding's 'racial' economy of science is a good handbook on this (1993). How do we bring this knowledge back? In the archaeology of knowledge, in a Focauldian sense, do we talk of power, conflict and hegemony? Or, do we simply seek the universal across cultures like many in the history of science try to do? Are both valid? My answer to myself is very simple. In social psychology, for the longest period of time, the smile as a facial gesture was considered to be a universal expression of happiness. Anthropology points out that there are communities where it just does not exist and, more importantly, there is no one way of smiling-it means different things in different contexts. I would like to treat the concept of zero similarly, whatever be the outcome it requires the same treatment. Of course, the laws of gravity do not change according to cultures but it might be enough to suggest that they might partially be constructed by human agency and the machinery of observation. It might be enough just to challenge the idea that there is no one world telling us what it is. But this is where all the problems begin, which are the present dominating theories of knowledge and we are all aware about it-the perils of relativism. This terrain is where Chayanika and I have located our course, where the idea of partial perspectives and situated knowledges come in, along with standpoints that work well in the biological and life sciences.
Mina Swaminathan
In most scientific institutions, especially those termed the clite ones (not just IITs; you must be knowing about the goings-on with dalit students at AIIMS [All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi]), there have been demonstrations against reservation, even upper-caste students pointedly cleaning shoes to show that that was the only job they would get if reservation went through. Such people are convinced of their intellectual superiority but unaware of what has produced it. 'Merit' is seen in a vacuum and not understood as a socio-cultural product.
One of the contributions of feminist thought, surely, is that of 'standpoint' or how situatedness or social location affects perspec-e. But while I said earlier that scientists, both male and female, ke all of us, are products of our social-cultural milieu, it is true only to some extent. We need not become prisoners of our milieu-otherwise there would have been no revolutions in history. By becoming aware of our own location, it is possible to liberate ourselves, at least, from some, of our constraints. Surely, that is what academics, in any discipline, should be best fitted to do.
Many upper-caste, upper-class male scientists (especially Tamilian brahmins and Bengali bhadraloks (educated, upper rastes), or perhaps they are only the most vocal) talk with pride of their lineage and family with a long tradition of scholarship, but fail to see the other side of the coin-that those without these caste-class) credentials cannot be expected to catch up in one generation, even with support, which they rarely get. One rarely comes across such responses from women scientists, because they have had to struggle against their own problems (gender) and are :00 busy confronting them, having no time to boast. This is not to claim that they are unsympathetic to the deprived castes but they tend to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with their men on issues like merit and reservation.
Biological scientists, today, are developing awareness and respect for the traditional knowledge (TK) of tribals, but this still lives side-by-side, to a considerable extent, in many cases, with the idea that they are 'primitive' and therefore lesser beings. Such reactions are expected from Indians, their well-known racism evoking strongly negative responses and worship of the 'fair' as opposed to the 'dark', though most of us are dark. Matrimonial columns, or the success of 'Fair and Lovely' (face cream), clearly demonstrate this. Yet, urban upper-caste and upper-class people are so unaware of the implications of their own 'situation' that they regularly claim in all sincerity to be casteless. But why should only social scientists carry the burden of 'being aware'? Are we not all living in the same society? Can't scientists cultivate
awareness too?
Chinese science, Arabic science (not Islamist) and post-Vedic science steered the knowledge of science in different epochs- some of them coexisted though spatially separated and their history of decline has been documented to some extent. Western science is the prevailing paradigm, and the paradigms of science, as readers of Thomas Kuhn (1962) know very well, change from time to time as a result of socio-cultural-economic changes. The paradigm itself is socially determined, and the present one is likely to change, perhaps soon. The thrust is now coming from the frontiers of physics as well as biology. A leading physicist specializing in string theory, Brian Greene (2011) says: 'It's almost harder to avoid the idea of parallel universes than it is to dream it up'. I am delighted by this-firstly, because as an avid reader of science fiction for a long time, who has seen the idea of parallel or alternate universes being imaginatively played for decades, it's good to know that it's now becoming a reality in hard-nosed physics. Other scientists hold consciousness as being the basic material of the universe, which sounds similar to the philosophy propounded by the Vedanta. The question of what happened before the Big Bang can also be dealt by applying another Indian philosophical concept-the cyclical or non-linear time. Such concepts cannot be assumed to have been derived from religion because these ideas were common to Buddhism, Jainism and the atheistic school of Hindu thought. This points at the 'situatedness' of the scientists, and helps in overcoming our own limitations and becoming aware of who we are.
Mary E. John
I cannot think of a better demonstration of how 'situated knowledges' emerge, that is to say how our understanding of the world has been shaped by our reflections on our own locations within it. So in that sense, Chayanika's memories of the students protest is not a digression at all, but rather intrinsic to our awareness of the way caste works in present times in the form of merit and its exclusions. There is one point in my earlier post that might be wrong or misleading which I would like to correct saying that caste was more complex than gender. This can be interpreted as meaning that caste is more important than gender in understanding our world and that would be wrong. The way I would put it now is that we know more about gender than we do about caste in contemporary society, owing to the collective and cumulative efforts of so many people across the world who have been in a position to reflect on and share their experiences of gender differences, disparity and the confinements of fixed gender identities. This does not mean that we know enough about gender-indeed, when I think of recent work in the science of sex and gender and about socialization and gender structures in society. I wonder what indeed does it mean to be a woman or a man. Further, how have women, in spite of being oppressed, gained by virtue of their relationships within families to men of privilege las daughters and in some cases as wives), in a way that other oppressed groups (so called lower castes, Muslims and so on) are unable to?
When it comes to caste we are obviously worse off for reasons that have been discussed earlier about castelessness and caste. I am fascinated by the discussions here on being brahmin from specific regions like Tamil Nadu and Bengal and the links that have been made with science and mathematics, and the privileging of certain scientific methods (which after all have emerged from modern western contexts of rationality, themselves often in a conflictive relationship with Christianity). Do we have an under- standing of how the connection between (western universal) science and the formation of modern brahmins was achieved? Has colomalism had a role to play here, and nationalism thereafter?
Prajval Shastri
I will first address the question raised as to why we don't have social scientists in scientific institutions.
I have been involved in a 10-day astronomy festival in Bangalore, organized in collaboration with Srishti Design School, which brought me into close working relationships with artist designers. During this interaction, I wondered if science institutions should have formal artist-in-residence' programmes. I fully agree that there is a tremendous lack of reflectivity in practising natural scientists like us, and from my own experience, I think that artists can worm their way in and change our outlook. I am all for the 'Cafe Scientifique'-type movements. Similarly, I would also vote for a 'historian in residence' programme like some institutions in the West.
A lot of very important social science thinking and writing is tough and beyond the ken of practicing natural scientists. There is a dire need for 'summing up for the lay person, that is, natural scientist'. (Most physicists, in particular, won't admit this. We would hide what we don't understand and therefore claim we don't need 'these flaky' social scientists.) My experience is that artists have the capacity/methodology to soften the arrogance.
On another somewhat related point, would social scientists in this group say that in general social scientists are less casteist than their natural science counterparts after all the recent advances in this field? I have heard anecdotal comments to the contrary. Just as there are plenty of physicists who teach/research physics in their institutions but practise eclipse baths/fasts, there are social scientists who highlight casteism in their academic practice but step out and practise it themselves. If this is true, I wonder if 'artist-in- residence' is a possible response to the situation.
Gita Chadha
These conversations are beginning to feel like the making of a patchwork quilt. Each of us is bringing our little piece of memory, thought, question and insight and stitching it on to another piece. With all our 'differences' of emphasis in explanations and solutions, as radical, liberal, socialist, postcolonial, black, queer positions, feminist movements and collectives-international, local and global-have played a huge role in decoding patriarchies by introducing and refining the category of gender. But for me, personally, feminist theory and epistemologies have been extremely exciting because they continuously straddle the poles of abstract knowledge on the one hand and embeddedness on the other. The praxis between form and content acquires new meanings in feminist thought; the most liberating has been the
pluralism of feminist theories and methodologies!
Recently, I read Saunders (2002). It has a section on the science question in development. It has three contributors, all of Indian origin-Vandana Shiva, Banu Subramaniam et. al. and Meera Nanda, which make very interesting reads.
Prajval has raised some very fundamental issues. There is a deep crisis in and of language while making dialogues across science and social science. It is easier when the conversations and dialogues happen between artists and writers because here the two are seen as not intersecting or overlapping each other. Amongst scientists and social scientists, dialogues on science are difficult because the former think the latter know nothing. In conversations between the two on society, the latter think the former are totally talking out of commonsensical understandings and opinions. This does create special problems. This is the problem of credibility. While Snow (1959) 1993) began this, the science wars continue to hamper this dialogue. More efforts like the one you are doing should help. But I think a deeper dent is required where it becomes mandatory for science institutions to introduce the teaching of philosophy, history and sociology of science and scientific knowledge. It will go a long way in developing reflexivity amongst practicing scientists. Keller ([1983] 1993) brings this out beautifully--she says that scientists often are so absorbed in doing their science which is all consuming, that they forget to ask questions; if those from the 'outside' help in asking these questions, why not?
Chayanika claims that reading social science is not easy for the natural scientist. It is not. But I am greatly impressed by those 'practising scientists' who actually do some. But let me urge you to look at the converse. I have often been told that I can't be doing science studies because I don't know science and even if I try picking up an issue of PRL," I will not make any sense of it because it is totally unintelligible to the non-expert. And therefore, whatever I do is deemed to be flaky, not hard enough. But I defy and argue that I don't need to know the content of science in order to critique positivism and the hegemony of science. And, I have enough working knowledge of what science is telling me about the world around me. But I do agree that both ways, we need to 'outreach'. My dream is to write newspaper columns on the theories of Marx, Weber and Durkheim about religion and science! I really think that it, for instance, will help in challenging 'atheism and an over-rationalist discourse on the divide between the two.
Social scientists here and those of us in borderlands observe that casteism is quite prevalent amongst social scientists. Perhaps the difference is that the 'caste question' is too much of a question in India for the social scientists to ignore-even more than gender. A male sociologist will claim with utter confidence that gender oppression is more imagined than caste oppression. But, thank- fully, feminist social scientists look at these categories as intersecting in patriarchies. The larger question here is the life of the mind of an intellectual? Does the academic profession necessarily make us more humane and reflexive? Empirically, it is not doing so, though in most cultures that is one of its designated 'functions'.
Sumi Krishna
Every time we draw out a thread, it becomes a patchwork-and this is possibly true of all such discussions, whether in science, art or social science. I have very recently finished reading Ruth Richardson's fascinating account of the making of 'Gray's Anatomy', which should really have been Gray and Carter's Anatomy 12 Apart from insights into social class and education in mid-nineteenth century England and the exploitation of the poor by the murky cadaver business, what is most interesting is the role played by Carter, who was also a surgeon and illustrator. The centrality of Carter's visual imagination to this project is because his meticulously detailed woodcut images are typical patterns of particular human parts, abstractions that enabled Gray to provide the lucid descriptions. Carter's art establishes a 'language' of medical drawing; he distances (and respects) the subjects in a way that is very different from that of his contemporaries; an earlier drawing of the uterus, for example, depicts it as it would have appeared on the dissection table (flesh nailed down and all).
Carter's skill is that the drawings are simplified and yet 'real'. It also strikes me as interesting that around the same period, he artist and engraver Walter Fitch was doing something similar For plant anatomy. Carter worked in India for three decades eventually heading Grant Medical College in Mumbai and Fitch crew the wonderful illustrations for Hooker's Himalayan Plants.
To return to Prajval's 'practical' post about artists and designers providing the links, I too think that artists and designers have the empathy and the skills to 'soften the arrogance' of scientists. This may be because they are not perceived as threatening fundamental positions, unlike social scientists (and feminists!). Moreover, many scientific journals now require quite sophisticated illustrations, so institutions and scientists have to engage with artists and designers. With time, perhaps, this makes scientists also begin to 'see' things differently. And as in the case of Carter and Fitch, in the public communication of science, the visual does seem to anpact upon the 'language' and understanding of science itself.
There are science institutes working closely with artists, but does anyone know of a social science institute with an 'artist in residence', or for that matter how many 'scientists in residence' there are in social science institutes?
NOTES
This discussion on the e-group FSS-India has been minimally edited to retain the spontaneity of the exchanges. All participants, located in Kolkata, Mumbai, Delhi, Chennai and Bangalore, agreed to publish the discussion, without introducing any afterthoughts. The annotations and bibliographic references were added by Sumi Krishna.
Abha Sur, scientist turned historian of science, is with the Women's and Gender Science department at MIT.
Socially and educationally backward communities are classified by the Government of India as Other Backward Classes (OBC), distinguished from Scheduled Castes (SC) and Scheduled Tribes (ST).
Raja Ramanna was a nuclear physicist and administrator, who was involved in the development of India's nuclear programme.

20
Anita Mehta et al.
5 The Senthilkumar Solidarity Committee, a group of Hyderabad-based intellectuals and activists, argued that the death of the research scholar in early 2008 was yet another example of how, despite reservations, caste discrimination continues to afflict institutions of higher learning in India. They also drew attention to the Thorat Committee Report on caste discrimination in the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi. The Mandal Commission, chaired by B. P. Mandal, was set up in 1979 by the Union Government, which was then under Janata Party rule. In 1980, the Commission submitted its report advocating affirmative action for lower castes, specifically the Other Backward Classes (OBCs), including quotas for admission to universities and government jobs. The Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled Tribes (STs) were already eligible for reservation in education slots, governmental jobs and in electoral constituencies under the Constitution.
Indira Jaising is a Supreme Court lawyer and human rights activist. In 2009, she was elected to a four-year term on the UN's Committee on Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). She served as Additional Solicitor General under the second UPA government. Feminist Science Studies course; see Chapter 12 in this volume. "The 'Cafe Scientifique' is a place where for the price of a cup of coffee or a glass of wine anyone can come to explore the latest ideas in science and technology. Meetings take place in cafes, bars, restaurants and even theatres, but always outside a traditional academic context. See http://www.cafescientifique.org/
10 This refers to the intellectual argument in the USA in the 1990s, between postmodern critics of scientific objectivity and the scientific method, and the realist scientists' counter-critiques that postmodernists did not understand the science that they were critiquing.
11 Physical Review Letters; see prl.aps.org/
12 Gray's Anatomy, published in London in 1858, became the classic textbook on human anatomy.
Feminists Discuss Caste and Gender in Science
21
Greene, Brian. 2011. 'Best-selling String Theorist: Betting on the Multiuniverse', interviewed by Amanda Gefter, New Scientist 2798 (7 February).
Harding, Sandra. ed. 1993. The 'Racial' Economy of Science: Toward a Democratic Future. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. -. 1986. The Science Question in Feminism. New York: Cornell University Press.
Keller, Evelyn Fox. [1983] 1993 (Tenth anniversary ed.) A Feeling for the Organism: The Life and Work of Barbara McClintock. New York: Henry Holt, LLC.
Krishna, Sankaran. 2006. "The Bomb, Biography and the Indian Middle Class', Economic and Political Weekly 61, 23 (10 June).
Kuhn, Thomas S. 1962. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ramanna, Raja. 1991. Years of Pilgrimage: An Autobiography. New Delhi: Viking.
Richardson, Ruth. 2008. The Making of Mr. Gray's Anatomy: Bodies, Books, Fortune, Fame. New York: Oxford University Press. Saunders, Kriemild. 2002. Feminist Post-Development Thought: Rethinking Modernity, Post-Colonism and Representation. London: Zed Books. Senthil Kumar Solidarity Committee. 2008. 'Caste, Higher Education and Senthil's Suicide', Economic and Political Weekly 43, 33: 10-12. Snow, C.P. [1959] 1993. The Two Cultures. Rede Lectures, 1959. Cambridge: Combridge University Press.
Sur, Abha. 2011. Dispersed Radiance: Caste, Gender and Modern Science in India. New Delhi: Navayana.
-2002. 'Scientism and Social Justice: Meghnad Saha's Critique of the State of Science in India', Historical Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences.
Thorat, Sukhadeo, et.al. 2007. 'Prof. Thorat Committee Report'. Government of India. http://www.scribd.com/doc/55596479/Prof- Thorat-Committee-Report-on-AIIMS; last accessed on 15 September
2012.
REFERENCES
Gadgil, Madhav. 1993. 'In Love with Life', Seminar (issue on 'Our Scientists')
409: 25-30.